---
title: "The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Constraints on Supermassive Black Hole Binaries from the Gravitational-wave Background"
pubtype: collaboration
collection: publications
tags: NANOGrav, NG15
category: manuscripts
permalink: /en/publications/2023-06-29-ng15-astro
excerpt:
date: 2023-06-29
venue: 'The Astrophysical Journal Letters'
paperurl: 'https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8213/ace18b'
#bibtexurl:
citation: 'Agazie et al 2023 ApJL 952 L37'
lang: en
translated: false
---

The NANOGrav 15 yr data set shows evidence for the presence of a low-frequency gravitational-wave background (GWB). While many physical processes can source such low-frequency gravitational waves, here we analyze the signal as coming from a population of supermassive black hole (SMBH) binaries distributed throughout the Universe. We show that astrophysically motivated models of SMBH binary populations are able to reproduce both the amplitude and shape of the observed low-frequency gravitational-wave spectrum. While multiple model variations are able to reproduce the GWB spectrum at our current measurement precision, our results highlight the importance of accurately modeling binary evolution for producing realistic GWB spectra. Additionally, while reasonable parameters are able to reproduce the 15 yr observations, the implied GWB amplitude necessitates either a large number of parameters to be at the edges of expected values or a small number of parameters to be notably different from standard expectations. While we are not yet able to definitively establish the origin of the inferred GWB signal, the consistency of the signal with astrophysical expectations offers a tantalizing prospect for confirming that SMBH binaries are able to form, reach subparsec separations, and eventually coalesce. As the significance grows over time, higher-order features of the GWB spectrum will definitively determine the nature of the GWB and allow for novel constraints on SMBH populations.

**My Contributions**
Lead of Section 3.5. Pipeline and software development, and application of astro-
physical Bayesian inference, using methods of Lamb et al. 2023 to real data and realistic spectra. Paper writing and review.