---
title: "The NANOGrav 15 yr Data Set: Evidence for a Gravitational-wave Background"
pubtype: collaboration
collection: publications
tags: NANOGrav, NG15
category: manuscripts
permalink: /en/publications/2023-06-29-ng15-evidence
excerpt:
date: 2023-06-29
venue: 'The Astrophysical Journal Letters'
paperurl: 'https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/2041-8213/acdac6'
#bibtexurl:
citation: 'Agazie et al 2023 ApJL 951 L8'
lang: en
translated: false
---

We report multiple lines of evidence for a stochastic signal that is correlated among 67 pulsars from the 15 yr pulsar timing data set collected by the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves. The correlations follow the Hellings–Downs pattern expected for a stochastic gravitational-wave background. The presence of such a gravitational-wave background with a power-law spectrum is favored over a model with only independent pulsar noises with a Bayes factor in excess of 1014, and this same model is favored over an uncorrelated common power-law spectrum model with Bayes factors of 200–1000, depending on spectral modeling choices. We have built a statistical background distribution for the latter Bayes factors using a method that removes interpulsar correlations from our data set, finding p = 10−3 (≈3σ) for the observed Bayes factors in the null no-correlation scenario. A frequentist test statistic built directly as a weighted sum of interpulsar correlations yields p = 5 × 10−5 to 1.9 × 10−4 (≈3.5σ–4σ). Assuming a fiducial f−2/3 characteristic strain spectrum, as appropriate for an ensemble of binary supermassive black hole inspirals, the strain amplitude is (median + 90% credible interval) at a reference frequency of 1 yr−1. The inferred gravitational-wave background amplitude and spectrum are consistent with astrophysical expectations for a signal from a population of supermassive black hole binaries, although more exotic cosmological and astrophysical sources cannot be excluded. The observation of Hellings–Downs correlations points to the gravitational-wave origin of this signal.

**My Contributions**
Spectral characterisation using various GWB and noise models; cross-validation of Bayes Factors computations, testing consistency of evidence with different noise models, GWB spectra, and telescope receivers. Bayesian analyses for Figs. 1, 2, 6, 10, 11, and 13. Tested evidence for additional inter-pulsar correlations, and evidence for continuous waves. Methods development and paper review.